all right here we go what's up man how
are you Joe great to be a show it's a
pleasure it's a pleasure to meet you and
an honor I've been following your work
for a long time man I mean I was first
introduced to you and your methods by
Steve Maxwell who was a you know a huge
proponent of the kettlebell and then I
started getting into very yeah very good
and I started getting in your videos and
I've read your books and so thank you
that's an honor my pleasure how long
have you been teaching and practicing
with kettlebells since you're a little
something like that medium that's it's
kinda likes baseball you know it's
pretty common in Russia in the storage
unit yeah it is why didn't he catch on
here until you came over here you know
what I don't think people really tried I
don't think people really understood
that would catch on and I did not think
it would happen either
so I'm sitting with my friend Marty
Gallagher having steaks years back marty
is a former coach for par lifting Team
USA and coach of some top lifters
anywhere just trading old war stories
talking talking about stuff and I told
about kettlebells he says well you've
got to teach Americans how to do that
and I said Marty you don't understand
this stuff is too hard nobody's gonna
want to do this and he said you don't
understand people want to do this and I
wrote an article for based on Marty's
suggestion for Milo so Milo was a
publication niche publication for
strange guys who lift rocks and bend
things and break things and so on and so
forth and so that was the start of it
and then after that I told my publisher
about it and he said well come on let's
just make kettlebells and teach people I
had told him the same thing
you don't understand that people will
not want to do this this is too hard and
but he convinced me and they convinced
me and the rest is history
why did you think that it was popular in
the Soviet Union but wouldn't be popular
in America you know this is something
that you just see it's very common thing
to so you just see this you don't think
much about this
who knows yeah but it was popular over
there yeah and it said at least since at
least 1700s or possibly before that but
this country is so performance oriented
and so sports oriented and so
competitive why wouldn't you think that
that would be sort of a natural training
modality that would immediately adopt it
you got me there
so you just decide in the US some years
back decades before there's some some
kettlebells were used by some old-time
strong men like Zig Klein for example
mhm and there was a company and they've
Milo no relations to the magazine really
what assess him with Milo why Oh Milo is
the guy who carried the calf so if you
go if you look okay the progressive
overload is usually explained as this
legend of Milo off Crotona so this guy
started carrying a little calf on his
shoulders and he would carry the calf
every day so the calf would grow and
eventually guy became very strong so
that's why that name is present in in
the strength game set back then today it
is just one of the finest publications
on strength training mostly niche things
again like gripping and what if anyone's
actually done that what carry a cow not
to work you know it isn't amazing that
something can grow physically faster
then you can keep lifting it absolutely
can but you know your typical training
plan that people say I'm gonna add five
phones to my bench press today I'm gonna
do this every week and that by Christmas
I'll be the world champion and it just
doesn't work so the rate of adaptation
is such that your body just cannot do
that and it's cyclical in nature so you
have to to put it in the Milo terms you
have to after you carry the calf for a
while it grows you have to back off to a
wider calf and start you know start
building up again why we do not know
exactly so for some reason that
unidirectional adaptation just in one
you know we're getting stronger at the
bench press or what have you
we're carrying the calf he just cannot
proceed indefinitely there
some fatigue of some endocrine
mechanisms some genetic mechanisms we do
not know that but tactically
we do have tricks of the trade to beat
that to work around that and there is a
number of ways of doing that the oldest
way of doing that and it's very smart
still very smart for a lot of people
they would call this I think possibly
constant weight training or something
like that but the Soviets described it
as step loading so let's look at your
typical last look at your typical
beginner somebody in the gym and so the
person starts lifting whatever weight
for whatever reps and the next week
let's say next week he has five pounds
and he does it again he does it again
well the Soviets figured out that it's
much better for him to stay at the same
weight for several weeks and then make a
bigger jump hmm so what you're doing
pretty much is you are the making that
updations more stable and it just
happens in the cellar levels membranes
become stronger and so on but all timers
just they would say that you're
solidifying the gains so the way that
many old timers trained is they would
just take the same weight and the
staying with the same weight for a long
time in the beginning it's challenging
and that it becomes kind of comfortable
that becomes almost easy and never jump
up so that's just one way of doing it
and today it's not unprecedented either
if you look at Chris summer his
gymnastics coach used that word gymnast
it's very common
I used that tactic with my latest
addition of my kettlebell simple and
sinister because it's much more reliable
than just progressive overload and also
because psychologically first of all the
weeds out the impatient people so you're
told to stay with the same load for a
while some people automatic iself forget
it I cannot do that
well I don't want these people for my
stuff
and second so you're staying with this
weight or these reps for some time in
the beginning they challenge you and
then some time goes by and suddenly they
don't anymore so just very much there's
a very clear clear sense of
accomplishment so this is called step
loading or using the old timers old
timers terminology that constant weight
training if you look at the other ways
of making progress so another approach
is called cycling and cycling so the one
that I just described that would really
be if we could artificially stop the
growth of the calf like okay stop going
mm-hmm for a while which we can but the
cycling this is where I mentioned
earlier this is where you go back to a
lighter calf so the classic American
powerlifting training template this is
cycling so the history of cycling is
very interesting again what cycling is
cycling is in the simplest possible
terms you take 12 weeks you start with
lightweights you build up until you go
really heavy and that was the
predominant strength training system in
the 70s in the 80s and that was the
strength system behind the dominant
American powerlifting team so lifters
like Eddie Cohn Kurt kawaski lifters
like Don Austin who is or Lamar Gant
whose deadlift records still stand
decades after they use this classic
cycling so the classic cycling you start
with the moderate moderately challenging
load then you keep proceeding go heavier
and have you have you then you compete
then you start over and to give you to
give you a very simple tactic that's
something that your listeners can use in
their training whether they follow this
cycling format or they do something else
is that Russian scientists discovery
that your endocrine system
pretty much can take two two weeks out
of four of heavy loading that's just how
it is there are some exceptions if you
but forget exceptions generally just two
weeks of heavy loading and if you look
at the classic powerlifting cycles by
let's say I'm at a Gallagher so for four
weeks you do sets of eight four weeks of
five four week sets of three and in week
one you start out with the way that's
comfortable in week two moderately
challenging in week three you hit your
repeats your previous PR for this reps
and a week for use such a new PR and
then you jump to the next rep count so
as you see in this particular template
you have two weeks two hard weeks of
training out of the month and that's
just one of the many ways of doing that
pardon me I got distracted so I wanted
to tell about the history of cycling
yeah so bill Starr who was a huge name
in the game he he was a former top
weightlifter in the United States back
in the 60s later on very successful
coach strength coach and author the
strongest shall survive his book on
strength training for football remains
one of the best strength training books
and Bill Starr recalls that American
lifters started getting a whiff of some
Russian paradise programs
so what's periodization theorization the
simplest terms is planning your training
according to certain principles to end
it beak performance so that's just the
really kind of a 50,000 level 50,000
foot definition and they did not have
their full full information about how it
was done so they just decided to do
exactly that and that was a very
successful very successful purchase
strength training it does not
necessarily work for everybody there are
some reasons for that mostly because of
your sport competition
you're an athlete but it's extremely
effective as was shown on the platform
and finally so first we discussed step
cycling step loading which is constant
training second we discussed wave
cycling which is just cycling right wave
loading and the third one would be the
variable loading and variable loading is
extremely unique it's unlike something
else so here's how variable loading
works in variable loading you have
certain load parameters like for example
you will know that your average training
weights will be 75% of your maximum you
will know that you will perform for
example 300 squats per month or whatever
so these numbers are arrived at
experimentally over decades and what
variable loading does as opposed to the
traditional methods traditional
progressive overload is that the jump in
volume for example from one training
unit to another one day one week one
month and so on it's at least twenty
percent so the jumps are really high
really high the variable loading was
developed by Professor Arcadia para
boeuf who was a Olympic weightlifting
champion and he was the premier sports
scientist so he argued that in nature
most changes are discrete there are not
gradual they're discrete so whatever
whatever adapt adaptation take place in
your body the same thing whatever
happens with many physical process
chemical processes and so on so he
concluded that training has to be highly
variable so you understand what I mean
that it's a 20% minimal change we call
that Delta xx principal it doesn't mean
that's constantly going up that's just
not possible it goes up and down it just
keeps flashing so if we use if we go
back to
the traditional cycling is an example
the traditional cycling so it's a linear
build-up back up a little
linear buildup back up a little in
contrast variable overload it's it's
going crazy
it's comfortably insane in fact this is
a little entertaining experience
strength coaches and especially people
with some sort of a background in
mathematics they are able to dissect and
analyze training plans from other
coaches you can look at a plan you can
take an experience powerlifting coach
show him a program from another coach
and the coach will be able to tell
whether this will work or not who this
will work for and so on and kind of
figure out what figure out what's under
the hood right there so there's a very
clear pattern variable overload so it's
like a photograph it's very clear
variable overload if you start analyzing
the pattern looking at the program so
for example buddy's shake oh he's a he's
a former coach of Russian national
powerlifting to you so he took the
Soviet Olympic weightlifting methodology
and directly applied it to bar lifting
so his plans have made their way to the
west and some liquors used them very
successfully but whenever he tried to
read this plan and try to make any sense
of that he just drives you crazy because
you see like ok here was a string here's
a pattern is going right here and
suddenly his gun
so if traditional cycling's like clear
photograph the variable overload makes
me think of remember in Ferris Bueller's
Day Off
where the kid is looking at so house
painting you know we want to use there
all these dots right there so when you
step away you see something we start
getting closer just a whole bunch of
dots it just disappears so what's the
story behind that so the story is this
this method the Soviet Olympic
weightlifting
method was developed over several
decades by a number of coaches by number
of scientists so it's a very much
collaborative effort so but IB offers
one for sure in the division of channel
Yakka number of others and it was a very
before even that sect in this method let
me tell you how how successful this
method was you can look up the world
weightlifting records in Olympic
weightlifting you hear about all this
different records set by this left her
that left her and so on and so forth if
you few people realize that the
International weightlifting Federation
has changed the weight classes at two or
three times since the eighties and the
reason they did that is to erase the
drug the records set by the drug taking
athletes back then of course you I'm
very happy that as soon as they changed
the weight classes lifter stop taking
drugs like that so if you look at these
records kilo per kilo pound per pound
and if you charred them compare them to
what they did then to what they do today
you will find that while they did catch
up in a few weight classes in about half
of these classes the records from the
eight is still standing so for example
what you d carbanion did in 1980 at 82
kilos he totaled 400 kills in the snatch
in the clean-and-jerk
that's never been done before and you
dick Val Bunyan was a wiry guy you
wouldn't even take it for a lifter just
amazing so first of all the system still
remains if we would just take a very
large big picture 50,000 foot look at
strength there great many ways of
getting strong some of them very good
some Dermody ochre some very bad but
historically in lifting sports the two
systems that have been predominant are
the Soviet weightlifting system and the
American classic powerlifting system
from the south
and eighties okay so that was a kind of
a long detour to before tell you why
this stuff that they figured out back in
nineteen sixty is why it matters just to
say it still is the best it still rules
so what they did is it was very
empirical in for example when you're
studying endurance going into the cell
studying the biochemistry of the cell in
the body taking apart figuring out how
this works is very helpful very on the
other hand when you're dealing with
strength that approach has been not
really effective so if we talk about
muscle muscle training for example
hypertrophy we still have no idea what
the hell is going on so we can we know
which buttons to push but that's just
empirical knowledge that's not the
understanding of the cell so we really
don't understand hypertrophy and really
no we do not
Wow know and let's I'll be happy to talk
about this but if you don't mind let me
just finish on this variable overload
and the Soviet weightlifting system so
what they did even though they also you
know they cut the muscle look at that as
well just didn't learn as much but they
coaches programmed particular loads for
athletes and watch what happen and then
they watched how the authors performed
and the watch how the top athletes
performed and it looked for patterns and
they were very open-minded so they're
not thinking like well it's got to be
just the heaviest weights will do that
or it's got to be the training to
failure it's gonna do that it's not the
case so just to give you an example of
how enormous that undertaking was so
typical strength training studies one
six weeks for some untrained college
subjects you know guys were just on
their phones popular media Jeff was also
world champion he studied the training
loads of top weight lifters only when
they were successful in competition for
for Olympic cycles for so we're talking
about sixteen years and then somebody
else to do for another cycle and they're
just an amazing patterns just emerged
so for instance I'm gonna give you give
you a rundown on what the patterns are
there are certain optimal volumes how
much exercise you do there is certain
optimal intensities so if you followed
the variable overload method the optimal
intensity so the average intensity would
be about 75 percent of your max which
for most people will be probably
somewhere like eight reps or something
could do maybe ten maybe eight and you
will see that about half of all the
lifts that you do are about 75 80
percent now we're do all the rest the
other lifts come in so there's a normal
distribution so you'll find that 75 80 %
on the top 80 85 a little bit lower you
know so the lighter weights like 60% are
in the bottom and they have your waist
like a 90 percent and higher are in the
bottom as well
so the figured out you just have to do
most of your work with these average
weights they are not so light so you're
gonna respect them but they're not so
happy that you're having in question
about performing lifting them correctly
so and then there is another aspect of
intensity is just doing some heavier
lifts very a very carefully measured
number of heavy lifts in addition like
90 percent or whatever occasionally then
they figured out the proper volumes just
to give you an idea if you're looking at
let's say you know you might be doing 30
reps of given exercise per session what
have you although there's variability
but then there's also something else
that's very interesting is the optimal
number of repetitions with the given
weight and this is what hurts people
hurts people's heads if you look at the
weights from 70 to 90% the optimal
number of repetitions are one third to
two thirds of your maximum so let me
give an example to the reader to the
listener let's say that you're lifting a
10 rep Mack
wait so you go all out as hard as
possible you can do ten reps in training
you should be doing you should be doing
three to six reps that's it that's
that's the window and why is that and we
have no idea but the scientists like in
this case that was I think was much fear
if was involved in that the father of
fertilization I think it was one of the
scientists they experimented with all
sorts of rep ranges and they figured out
that it D reps are too low really giving
a weight you don't get stronger if the
reps get too high either the athlete
gets hurt or his technique is
compromised or he's just unable to
perform the optimal volume so pretty
much roughly you're looking at doing
about half of the reps you capable of
that's it and people can argue with this
all they want
like what's the science behind this
there's no science we don't know the
science is purely empirical this
particular method is purely empirical it
worked for decades it still does and
that's one of the ways you can get
strong so in summary we have we have
sorry step loading which is where you
stay with the same weight for a while
we're the same reps whatever and then
make a sudden jump that's the best way
to train for beginners usually we have
wave loading or cycling which is we
build up jump back and build up again
and we have variable loading which is
almost almost chaotic we're just
constantly surprised the body with what
we're throwing at it but we do that
within very narrow parameters so this
method was purely developed by studying
winners and winners is where they
finally took that but these studies were
done at every level
some for example coaches in the field
would conduct something called agogic
experiments which is which is a study
that's not quite as not quite as
scientifically solid but it's too good
an
so that first what testing is out lower
level athletes and they'll finally take
it to higher level athletes so the
things that I'm telling you about they
have been universally effective for
athletes above the beginner level and of
course there are some subtle changes as
you progress there are some subtleties
like for instance notice that I said
that you have to use some heavy lifts
like 90 percent 95 percent it has to be
very surgical about how many so for
instance beginners do none advanced
lifters need to do just some but not
many intermediate lifters can do the
most or heavier weight lifters can do
not as many lighter ones can do more so
there are some differences at different
levels but the principles fundamentally
the same and these principles apply
whether people are taking drugs or not
yes they do the difference is in fact
the special skill Medvedev made a very
strong case very strong case of that
they used the Soviet of abysm for that
was restoratives and they said this is
universal even with restoratives or not
the difference for this for the drugs
would be is just that the volumes will
be higher you'll be able to train more
that's pretty much the difference but
the body will still work the same way
now these principles have they caught on
in the United States
I mean they've caught on with strong
first I know the UT you implement these
and people teach these but is this
something that's universally sort of
accepted or is it still something that
people are cute cautiously curious about
it's definitely not universal in part
because people don't know about it
in part you have to implement this
correctly so right now this several the
several areas where you would see that
is well one obviously the body circo's
powerlifting programs that have been
imported here by the use by power
lifters mm-hmm the other is we have the
program called plant-strong which is
been again this is a very faithful
representation of the Soviet
weightlifting system but apply it to
general strength exercises like you know
squats deadlifts and so on
and the other thing what we also do and
this is what we do was with the military
and so on and so forth we have some
simple programs very simple programs
that are designed using this Delta xx
principle and using this optimal loads
that they could just go out and use the
nice thing is unlike progressive
overload cycling if something happens
you got a problem here there's some
variability so in summary just say no
it's not widely known it's not now in
the States
yeah let's fix it and it makes sense and
one of the things that I really like
what you're saying about is completing
the adaptation with your tendons and
your ligaments and all these different
things that oftentimes are injured when
you're ramping up your weight lifting
and you're trying to increase the amount
of weight you carry you so this this
principle of maintaining at a similar
weight for a long time allowing your
body to complete that adaptation that
makes a lot of sense adaptations need to
be stable and it does it's not true just
for strength training if you're looking
at endurance as well the adaptations and
the mitochondria is wealthy you can get
some acute adaptation so very short-term
like oh you know bigger whatever guns in
six weeks or faster 400 meters or six
weeks yes you can do that but these
adaptations are transient so it takes
time for things to really get got
solidified and also if you're more
patient with your progression as well
you're gonna find that your gains are
much more stable if you take some time
off which is important for anybody you
travel you get sick some other thing
happens so if you've been training in a
manner where you're not forcing yourself
in fact this is one of the very
important points in that Soviet coaches
would make that do not force the
temptation there David rigored riggers
probably the greatest weightlifter of
all times so he is over 60 World Records
in several weight classes
and just unbelievable athlete so he just
made a point that do not force the
strength development do not force mass
development that's another problem you
start it's possible to build muscle fast
but it's not giving necessarily very
quality muscle so yes take your time and
and this is interesting enough Joel this
is what old-timers understood I am a fan
of books by old-time strongman not all
of them of course but some of them are
just remarkable Earl Lederman he was an
American strongman an educator he wrote
a book back in 1925 called the seekers
of strength and it's an awesome book so
you read this book and if you follow the
directions in this book from 1925 you
will get far superior results and for
most pop fitness and strength programs
because people who had some sense some
common sense they were able to get
observe what's going on they were not
driven by some slogan oh one more rapid
yeah yeah the one more rep thing is a
it's very embraced here in America
yeah with meatheads which are my people
the the thing about it is that you think
that mental toughness is going to push
you past your limits or what your
perceived limits are and that that's
where the real strength what happens
that's where the real growth takes place
does have is a very valid point for for
you mentally not physically mentally but
periodically this is very important
point you have to push the but push the
body to the limit whether in competition
with some other man earn but for a short
period of time and not too often that's
very important you know who Ronnie
Coleman is right yeah yeah Ronnie
Coleman who was mr. Olympia just at one
point in time one of the most impressive
and spectacular physiques on earth is
now so injured from all of his
incredible lips he was known for lifting
enormous enormous amounts of weight and
I mean I think when they asked him about
if we do anything different
I think he's had I hope I'm not wrong
but I think more than 11 back surgeries
over the last few years
he's essentially herniated every single
disc in his back and a series of back
operations it's left him walked in with
crutches and you know it's it's bad but
this is the result of this sort of
mindset of a champion you know that he
was you're barred me I'm going to
interrupt you for a second
the champion has that mindset on the
platform the champion whatever the
champion is in the gym he or she is
going to approach this as a as a working
man pretty much this is the plan this is
what I do so you will find that
absolutely in in sports you have to be
extremely tough and you have to model
some of that in training is well but in
a very very careful time matter yeah so
for instance top lifters stop power
lifters they max twice a year had the
Nationals and at the worlds meanwhile
they train hard to push themselves to do
everything right but they do not try to
squeeze out one extra rep he just simply
will not work it does not work
I remember having conversation with Andy
Bolton and he is the first man to done
it 2,000 pounds and just speak tiger
athlete if you watch Andy pullin
competition is just just unbelievable
it's a thing of beauty
and I just Andy was telling me how how
some lifters he have seen that would
just simply try to hang with others
better lifters in the gym and try to
repeat exactly what they do and that's
what happens after that nothing good
happens from that hmm you have to be
tough when it's time and the gym you
have to do the plan and like for example
let's talk about heavy lifting just
heavy singles let's say if I'm sure
everybody who listens to your program
has at what point of their life decided
to up their benchpress
by going to a maximum once a week I'm
sure everybody has I have you have
everybody has how how long did it last
typically six weeks for beginner and an
advanced lifter might tolerate two or
three weeks and that's about it
so for whatever reasons after that you
know your nervous system starts burning
out your endocrine system can keep up
and that's it so for that reason before
the competition you might take like a
90% single a double or something like
that and if you look at the longevity of
power lifters and if you look at
Langella T of the weight lifters of the
Soviet school it's very impressive
now I'll give you one great example so
well
David rigored himself who was the
champion around you know in the 70s so
he is way he is probably pushing 70
right now you know lives in a farm works
in the farm but he's Co doing great very
healthy but his coach that's that's
anyone more interesting story rudolf
plukfelder he was probably the oldest to
win the Olympics and weightlifting he
was 36 and he worked in the mines in
daytime and then train hard so look for
that ethnically here so ethnically he's
German so it one of the Germans living
in the Soviet Union and eventually when
the Soviet Union fell apart
crooked emigrated to Germany yeah a
journalist came to visit him and so
here's this really spry looking guy
pulling her on in the garden and the
Gerald is asking pardon me sir may I
speak to your dad so here's this guy who
is almost 90 years old still looks about
30 years younger who still does jump
squats with 90 kilos four sets of ten
and this is an example so have your
weights don't have the same longevity
but does house more that does not have
anything to do with the training system
that has to do with the fact that the
strain you put in your system by eating
so much just not so good but these guys
have longevity if you also look at
the powerlifters most successful
powerlifters american part lifters Eddie
cone competed for if I'm not mistaken
about thirty years at the highest level
from a very lightweight class to much
heavier one and he stayed super healthy
throughout he maybe had one injury and
Eddie right now yours have a after
retirement is very very healthy so you
will find that the mentality of saving
this I have the tiger for when it
matters as opposed to treating every
training day as a competition that makes
a big difference for performance and
longevity it just battles the mindset of
always do more always push harder always
give your all leave everything in the
gym thus this is the mindset that people
have been sort of indoctrinated into
sure if they think that a hard work is
what really matters but hard work
doesn't matter but hard work can come in
a lot of different it can manifest
itself differently would that approach
have worked with a guy like Ronnie
Coleman because he's a bodybuilder so
bodybuilders obviously you're not
talking about competition and sense of
being able to lift a lot of weight and
you're talking about just mass acquiring
mass well you know the bodybuilders from
the older era like Franco Columbu very
sad that doctor Colombo passed recently
but he was an exceptionally strong man a
very healthy man he died swimming yeah
was a hard issue that has nothing to do
with lifting so he was very health and
very strong till the end and if you look
at the guys of that generation they're
you know they're doing great and if you
look at other bodybuilders power power
lift and let's say bodybuilders who have
some kind of a power bodybuilding
approach these guys have been around
longer as well if you look at the
old-timers again Dave Draper this guy's
name Oh Clarence best you know cleans
bath sure okay super shredded Clarence
is a friend of mine and Clarence is well
let's put it this way he's not a spring
chicken but he's got an absolutely
spectacular physique he's still staying
very strong are there reasons determined
yeah what how old is
no it's gotta be in the seventies right
pushing 80 possibly yeah there he is
yup that's Chloe's he's awesome that
guy's awesome that is crazy that picture
of him lifting his shirt up with this
complete grandpa face and just super
jacked body the guy's incredible yeah he
knows how to push himself when you need
to move himself yeah well he's very very
intelligent that guy but old top
athletes and lifters are very
intelligent mmm there are some flukes
but they don't last long right I see
what you're saying yeah for longevity
you sort of have to have that sort of
intelligent approach so do you think the
guy like Ronnie Coleman would have would
be able to achieve the mass and the size
and the the way he was built with a
different strategy I can speculate I
don't know but I can speculate but if
you look at the muscle mass that have
been achieved by heavyweight power
lifters like Kirk Kowalski look up that
guy Kurt Kowalski K a are W o s ki so if
you see that type of development
achieved by heavyweight power lifters
then I don't see why not
hmm and bodybuilders have their own
additional techniques they still have to
do their stuff for their separation and
whatever it is that you do but I think
there's a very good chance that you
would have and if you look at the
successful power like Mike O'Hearn for
example that's a very strong guy he's a
power bodybuilder
there we go his car wash machines
crossing the size of that fucking guy
[Laughter]
yeah he looks like a body but look at
the size of his legs that has done is
ridiculous yeah and that guy just would
not fool around with tech whatever deck
and what-have-you
PEC deck yeah you say that disdainfully
why don't you say it was there's a lot
of people don't understand what's wrong
with it
you know machines are this is an
interesting point of view okay
there is a belief that machines are
great for beginners
and because you don't have to control it
they say ferns isolated so on and so
forth really machines have limited use
for advanced lifters when they're
injured or whenever they have to just
really focus on something so it's
possible it's possible to use a machine
if you're really messed up you can find
some angle but a beginner starts doing
leg presses
it's can totally mess up his
coordination just lining up the back
strengths isn't like an IVs AB strength
hmm so machines are not necessarily bad
so the tech deck might be okay
for bodybuilders looking for more cuts
or for somebody recovering from an
injury knowing exactly the angle to
which to push but your typical person
going the gym has no business doing that
none one of the things that I love about
kettlebells is a it promotes functional
strength it promotes the entire body
moving as a unit and that seems to apply
very quickly to athletics it's one of
the reasons why Jitsu people have
adopted kettlebell training so almost
universal absolutely there are many
reasons why but that's one of them yeah
and non-glamorous moves like Turkish
getup which is like one of the very best
moves for jiu-jitsu it's just phenomenal
for your stability your core and your
your ability to get out from under the
bottom bottom positions it's so just a
phenomenal work phenomenal work out but
the these principles of using the entire
body and you don't with kettlebells
using different parts of your body your
legs your core your ab all in one one
workout it's also so it's so effective
timewise because you can get a
spectacular work out in a very short
amount of time
you're correct oh maybe this is a good
time to discuss the benefits of
kettlebells versus let's say barbells or
BOTS sure that's very good conversation
that's a question ask people ask often
right so I would name these as three top
modalities for people yes there are some
other additional things dumbbells and
whatever but that usually they're
secondary so what are the respective
benefits of these different modalities
the body weight is obviously it's
accessible it's with you no matter where
you go but interestingly enough the body
weight requires the most coaching so you
have to it's very subtle like for
example if you look at developing
something the gym is called the hollow
position takes a lot of coaching to
perform it correct even pull-up or
push-up it's is a lot of work one legged
squad so on and so forth so it's great
in takes but it just takes more time
more investment also the down side of
the body weight would be you can't
return your lower back effectively and
you have to train your lower back to see
you on you just have to and whatever you
do back extensions other stuff neck
bridges it's not gonna do for your back
just form so body weight grade modality
but with its these limitations the
barbell if you just love heavy stuff
it's awesome and it's just
psychologically it's extremely
satisfying I have a debt of let's say
for some people not for all then if
you're looking for it to maximize your
muscle mass nobody has come up yet with
anything other than the barbell so you
know you start doing you know some
repetition deadlifts squats so on so
that's another reason but let's say
you're playing football right the
problem with the barbell first of all is
the learning curve it takes some time to
learn it correctly it's not easy to
master it and it takes a lot of
instruction in addition the barbel is
not forgiving so let's say that one of
your shoulders is jack table it's just
not very forgiving because you can't you
just have to adjust yourself to the bar
as opposed to make the implement adjust
yourself so this is where the kettle
book comes in first of all the
kettlebell because it moves freely it
adjusts to your body to your physiology
Anatomy I should say so it works it
worked quite well for example mark
Rifkin he is one of my top instructors
he was highly successful gymnast in the
past and later on he was a coach for
women's part left and national team and
great power lifter too so he cannot do
bilateral exercise as well because of
the mileage he
sustained you took a very bad landing as
a gymnast ruined his knee and on from
there other things went bad back
whatever so but he can do one arm so he
cannot do two arm swings because it just
messes him up hmm
but he can do what I'm swing so the body
compensates old differently and he can
handle it so it's with the proper
medical clearance it's much easier to
work around problems then the offset
center gravity that is tremendous thing
for your back I'm sorry for your
shoulder so the position is to put your
shoulder in you cannot do with anything
else but and you obviously you have the
getup which is an amazing exercise
cannot do it as well with other
implements but the ballistics that's
another unique benefit of the kettlebell
swings and snatches exercises like that
the benefits of these exercise are many
so first of all ballistic loading
obviously is part of sports and it's a
part of life and often times it's hard
to do it safely go ahead start jumping
it like before somebody starts jumping
correctly jumping off boxes and so on
and so forth just even you know hopping
across the floor it requires some
coaching it requires getting some
strength
it requires addressing some dysfunction
and so on and so forth the kettlebell
swing for example it's so many hard men
with high mileage who are really banged
up in so many different ways their backs
their knees their hips they're able to
do swing safely and that's just
remarkable and their ballistic
contractions very important so we have
to run you have to jump you have to do
things like that but it goes beyond that
for your health for longevity so as we
grow older there's a loss of type 2
muscle muscle fibers so the strong ones
the fast twitch fibers and there are
several problems with that first of all
they're metabolically needed for the
body to be healthy to process sugar so
on so on and so forth
second is to deal with real-life
situations you know like it's very
unfortunate some old person trips and
breaks a hip it's terrible and
oftentimes the reasons just weakness and
we need this fast fibers because
whenever you trip and you have this
reflexive contraction
these fibers go online first so if you
don't have them anymore you got massive
problems right so another reason is in
type ii fibers there is mitochondrial
degeneration takes place is you're older
much faster than others and if you don't
take care of that it's also that's aging
so you've got to train this type ii
fibers and they're only two ways to
train type ii fibers it's heavy or fast
so there's no third way so whenever
people try to do some sort of a super
slow this or pilates that whatever it's
not gonna do it so you have to train
heavy we have to train fast if you want
to stay young so are you completely
against that kind of super slow training
not at all but for totally different
reasons there is well obviously one
reason as possibly somebody's injured
right mm-hmm another reason is to
develop your type one endurance fibers
hypertrophy for these fibers why would
you want to do that well first of all
type one fibers they downside of these
fibers is they contract slower so
obviously that's a downside for some
sports for some activities but they're
also more efficient which means it's
plus for other sports right so mmm-hmm
another positive here they already come
pre equipped with mitochondria so
mitochondria that's why aerobic
metabolism takes place and by building
your type one fibers you automatically
get more endurance in addition to muscle
mass and strength too so super slow work
is good for that but it has to be done
correctly the proper methods were
developed by
Russian professor Victor C Leonov and so
he developed this method I'm gonna
summarize it free right now for your
free listeners that's something you can
easily do yourself well easily is not
the word simply so the duration of a set
is 30 to 60 seconds you have to select
the range of motion where there's no
there is no stacking there's no there's
no support from your bones at all so for
example if you were to do a squat you go
down below parallel but not to the point
where you sitting on your calves and
come up just a little above parallel and
below again so just that most unpleasant
the most painful area hmm if you're
doing let's say push-ups for your chest
for example you would almost brush the
deck with your chest come up about half
way and come back down and the speed is
very slow so there's no momentum at all
now doesn't sound like anything new but
here's what's new juliana i optimize the
rest periods and and that's a big dmg
game-changer normally when people train
in this manner bodybuilders and others
they just want to get more burn possible
and by the way the burnt is awful and in
this particular case you want to train
close to failure and in this particular
case that's just a muscular training
that's not strength training per se so
they try to run for one set to the next
so they'll do this let's say that 30
seconds said then they will just you
know rest for 30 seconds duty again
completely hammer themselves the problem
with that is even though we do not know
the exact mechanisms of muscle growth we
do know that some lactic acid is needed
but too much like the Cassidy's
destructor so what see Leonov did is he
figured out is after this kind of set
you have to rest for five to ten minutes
and that sounds for people it's it's
very hard mental thing to do so here I
am going for this massive burn
and I have to wait for five to ten
missed but it's very simple you
introduce another exercise in between so
train twice a week five to five to ten
sets on the heavy day eventually once
you build up to it and about one to
three sets in the Y day that's it now
this is incorporating super slow
technique yeah and who would this be
good for wrestlers mmm for wrestlers is
spectacular yeah because even though
there are explosive elements there as
well but it's also very much there's
that static element static endurance and
one of my strong first - one of my
strong first certified instructors Roger
from the UK he I had him follow this
protocol before he and his crew rode
across the Atlantic and he did much
better off than most people and was much
happier if you can be happier rollin
across the Atlantic
so for rowing for wrestling for
bodybuilding for some people who cannot
do anything else so that's a good
protocol so this is essentially a
muscular endurance protocol you know
what is both because because the muscles
getting bigger right and it will get
stronger but it won't be faster it's not
something you wouldn't know great with a
boxer I wouldn't know absolutely not no
definitely not
wrestler yes MMA you just have to use
your judgement there be certain things
on your style yeah now this is it's so
interesting hearing this big long break
in between exercises because it makes
sense it makes sense you would want the
muscles to be fully recovered because
then they'd be able to do more work but
that's so counterintuitive to what
everybody promotes every you go to a
coach you get a you get a you know a
personal trainer or something like that
they they just want to burn everybody
out that's all come on let's go let's go
next exercise let's go let's go let's go
let's go that's about feeling yeah
that's not that's about feeling and
that's about time management possibly
and there are other ways no and there
are other ways to save time there are
other ways of doing that depending on
your circumstances you can definitely
find ways of doing that but you can fill
in the time with other things
you know let's say you're doing this
hypertrophy protocol and by the way
that's been used extensively by Russian
national judo and Sambo teams so you're
doing some rows and the belt you know
the guys holding you up then you walk
around for a minute you do the push-ups
then you walk around you do something
else so you're making good use of the
time you're just not revisiting the same
exercise so instead of taking ten
minutes in between any workout at all
you would take just a couple minutes
you're in between and then do like
push-ups and then do something that's
non related to that so think of it as a
slow circuit mmm yeah okay slow circuit
but then you'd go back to whatever it
was that you were initially doing ten
minutes later correct yeah so those
muscles are recovered but
physiologically you're still getting
this constant state of exercise or at
least fairly constant with some you with
the lowest amount of break in between an
exercise you recommend that would be
that's the guidelines Eliana's
guidelines about five minutes if they
arrest is active for the same access I'm
talking about so active rest means
you're moving you're not just sitting
jumprope maybe not necessarily this
would be probably just walking around
maybe could do some super easy shot of
boxing or something or like footwork or
some but I mean extremely extremely easy
so that facilitates the circulation okay
yeah just just do that and it'll pass if
it's longer that's wow it's again so
counterintuitive to what most people
call like particularly something like
CrossFit right CrossFit is all about
massive reps and doing the most that you
possibly can and you know switching from
one thing quickly to another thing how
do you feel about that
so how about we take one minute I'll get
myself another tee and I'll address that
I'm good yeah choice it's good question
man
very good question excellent questions
oh thank you another do you know how to
do it no no idea
all right Jamie will do it for you right
now it's all you I have a cup here I
think he's gonna get you another cup it
whether you like it or not this is not
in the in the shot is it it doesn't
matter okay to me in the shot
that this all this uh this stuff is so
it's so interesting because it's so
obviously I mean make sense but it's
just not the method that anyone thank
you look at the top coaches if you look
at top athletes who don't necessarily
advertise what they're doing that's not
that's not the case
so it's more common now is getting there
yeah oh sorry this let me let me do this
let me dump this in there are you a tea
fanatic no I'm just a warm liquid
fanatic my best my favorite my favorite
worm liquidus Canetti no Italians make
it it's like zest from lemon and you
boil it stuff is good yeah yeah do you
drink caffeine yeah yeah occasionally
no no twice a day but just a very small
alone don't want to be running running
your own buzzing yeah that's what I like
about it you like buzzing yeah I'm good
man
keep buzzing so tell me about CrossFit
so CrossFit was it what is your question
about CrossFit exactly the methods that
they use this the sort of competition
with Olympic style lifts doing it to
maximum reps doing it for speed do you
think that's a recipe for injury or do
you think it's a good modality if
pursued correctly I'm going to start by
saying that I like the fact that
CrossFit gets people out guess people
training they have a great community
people are very motivated I like the
fact that they understand the concept of
general physical preparation which means
you have to train multiple different
qualities I would not go about it the
way they do it and let me explain to you
why so let's talk about endurance so
there are different aspects to endurance
and so there's cardio and there is the
local the peripheral endurance in the
muscles muscular endurance so first two
let's discuss how do we develop cardio
let's discuss how we develop endurance
in the muscle the best the healthiest
way to develop your cardio is just
steady-state exercise like running in a
particular particular speed that's not
too fast that's very simple that's so
that's way to develop cardio for most
people it is for most people it is and
so here's what's happening what's
happening is the heart is stretching
when you increase your heart rate up to
a certain point the heart starts
stretching more and it stretches more
and more so that increases the stroke
volume so pretty much you get a bigger
heart and that's good that works up to
not quite 90 percent of heart rate when
you start redlining your heart rate when
you start getting to 90 percent and
higher the heart does not have time to
relax fully so it really pretty much is
twitching so you're no longer really
stretching that hard so you want to be
training at the metabolic intensity
that's much lower something we're
getting pretty much sustained a
conversation so like say you're running
and talking to your body that's what you
want to stay to develop endurance that
what to develop to stretch your heart
that's the basic method so that's one
method hmm so the second method is
interval training so and the interval
training for the heart was developed by
Germans decades ago and these guidelines
still stand so here's what they figured
out they figured out that you're well we
know that this various systems and you
body have inertia so for instance note
is that when you're running hard and you
stopped your heart still beating hard
and then maybe ten seconds after there's
a sudden drop right there sir is that
inertia so the Germans figured out if
you get your heart rate up to about
eighty five ninety percent which
is it's hard but it's still not maximal
and then you switch to walking or
jogging so the heart is still beating
and so as this extra volume of blood is
moving in the stretches the heart so it
works really well so you can use the
intro method as well but it's it was
found it's used best after after a
period of steady state training it's
very demanding on the body and it's not
it's just it's too easy to have problems
with the heart if you start using it
prematurely then there's also such a
thing as high heart rate under heavy
loads so in this particular case we're
talking about dynamic exercises so as
dynamic exercise running bicycling
skiing even light kettlebell swings
that's dynamic exercise when you start
doing static exercises let's say you're
trying to do squats heavy squats for you
know to get your cardio so to say that's
not the best idea because that
interferes with the blood flow that did
something called after load versus
preload the heart gets thicker instead
of the heart gets you know get stretched
and bigger so it's not the optimal way
to train the heart you can again this
simple way you can use dynamic exercise
in interval type training or repeat
training in this case to train your
heart is to do an exercise that's
dynamic in nature to raise your heart
rate to about let's say 8090 percent
which would be 8090 percent it would be
where you can say maybe a couple words
you know you're not you're not dying yet
you can still answer a question and then
you just walk around and you do it again
so that's a simple way of how much time
walking around that depends that totally
depends on who you are to bend some
master how fast your you know heart rate
drops back down and what do you wanna
like is there a number you want to keep
it in the 140s the 150s is dependent
upon your age okay
in this particular case you would do you
would drop it down the original
guidelines were done for young people
those hundred twenty hundred thirty
beats so you're talking about sixty
sixty-five percent and pretty much if
you are just looking at being able to
pass the talk test which means you can
talk you know short sentences hmm I can
speak in a short something like that
right so for example you do a set of ten
swings really powerful with a kettle
bell walk around a little bit when you
feel that you can speak again you do it
again do it again so that's a simple way
of doing that but the heart is only a
very small part of endurance so we
definitely need to do some cardio for
health and athletes definitely need to
do for their performance but what we
really need to focus on is you need
mitochondria so mitochondria in the in
the muscle cell so that's where energy
is being converted to aerobic Li which
means efficiently so if you look at the
way your muscle uses energy so you will
get this energy with food converted it
goes down eventually the final currency
so to say is something called ATP but
it's only you know you only have it for
a few seconds so it has to be reloaded
so we have three main energy systems so
have the creating a phosphate system
it's very powerful but it's only can do
you know go for just some seconds and
it's clean burning we have high aerobic
system that's not powerful at all but
it's longer-lasting and we have the
glycolytic system that's kind of in
between that dumps a lot of acid and
other fatigue metabolites in there so
what we want to do as we want to develop
this mitochondria in our muscles it's
easy to do in slow fibers and it's a
little more involved in fast fibers I'll
tell you how we can do that but it can
be done so what we're looking for
instead of trying to trash the muscle
with acid we are trying to train in a
way that to produce less acid
and then only before the competition
right before the competition couple
weeks out you do a couple of kind of a
smokers like that to get yourself used
to that that's thing so the way we
develop mitochondria which means make
your muscle oxidative make your muscle
enduring and not polluting in slow fiber
is it's simply moving right below
anaerobic threshold so anaerobic
threshold
it's that intensity at which you you
know acid is accumulating just up to a
certain point it stays at that steady
state and you can keep disposing of that
for a while
for quite a while as soon as you go
above it very rapidly you crash so
running right below that aerobic
threshold is the primary training method
for endurance athletes and how do you
know that you ran the threshold when you
fail in the TOC test that's a simple way
to do that and it's very interesting
that endurance athletes even though who
are not necessarily well-educated they
kind of tend to grab it taste or that
intensity and so what happens is we are
producing just small amounts of acid and
the body finally is able to you know
produce less and less so that's how we
train our robic I'm sorry that's how we
train mitochondria in slow fibers for
fast fibers it's become something more
interesting so the conditions the
conditions for making the mitochondria
be able to handle more traffic without
producing as much acid is push them just
to the edge of acidosis just just to the
edge and do it over and over and over so
professor Becker sanski back in the 80s
figure out that that's a guy who
invented plyometrics and so on so he
figured out so here's what we do imagine
that you are sprinting as he's sprinting
for five seven seconds
and then you are just walking and you're
sprinting again and you're just walking
but you're doing that you're measuring
your blood lactate and it still keeps
below the threshold and you sustain that
for let's say 40 minutes so think of
this for a second
so you're sprinting very intensely but
you stop before you start burning you
get to the point of just light muscular
fatigue and you do it over and over and
over so if we talk about the coaching
terminology its repeat training versus
interval training so what is interval
training partners you'll have to take a
step to the side so the three types of
rest periods between your sets while
you're running lifting whatever so
there's a stress period that means that
you will have a harder time to do the
same thing or you will not be able to
repeat it right that's interval training
there is the super compensation period
which means if you wait extra long time
you'll perform even better like for
example if you do a set of pull-ups wait
for 15 minutes you might be able to do
more 15 minutes later and there is the
ordinary period which is that you be
able to repeat it over an hour so that's
in coaching speakers called repeat
training repeat verses interval so we're
trying to sustain that same level of
performance for 40 minutes let's say so
that's an example of how we develop
mitochondria fast which fibers and the
same thing we can do with kettlebell
swings the same thing you can do work in
a heavy bag and so on and so forth
now CrossFit let's see it's a circle
back around to that what do they do that
you feel you said there's a lot of good
things they do they get people moving
they introduce people to all these
different exercise routines what do you
think they do wrong Joe I don't want to
pick on CrossFit this so called
metabolic conditioning has been around
since 1975 at least when Arthur Jones
coined that term you know the guy from
Nautilus
mm-hmm that's when he would people go
through a circuit of machines going you
know going one after the next and I'm
sure it's been around even before that I
would just do things totally different
so there is no point in there's no point
in me trying to criticize criticize a
different system I'm just telling you
this is what the science says experience
says is how you should be doing it
mm-hmm and I think that there are a lot
of great people in CrossFit and I just
wish you know power to them
you would just do it the what like what
you're talking about with longer rest
periods different sort of training
approach and okay let's say that you're
training for the CrossFit Games
okay I'd say that you're going right
what you would do is name some CrossFit
exercise let's say wall ball okay let's
have the throw the ball against the wall
good exercise you do this thing with
this wall ball for 40 minutes like I
told you and you can incorporate a
second exercise in between Dustin
between stick it in there so let's say
you do a wall ball you throw this a few
times walk around you do a set of
push-ups let's say 5 to 10 reps and you
do this for 40 minutes
why 40 minutes it doesn't always have to
do 40 minutes but pretty much we know if
you can sustain it for 40 minutes it's
not gonna be overly glycolytic so we
just kind of know that I'll give you
another example let's say burpees right
you can do a burpee but time it in a way
that you can keep doing burpees for 40
minutes so you do a wrap walk around do
a wrap walk around or even break it up
so you do these different across fit
specific competition specific exercises
in this particular manner where you're
able to sustain it again for 40 minutes
then pardon me
closer to the competition you start
doing what in track is called peaking so
when you're running let's say 400 meters
or 800 meters athletes when they train
in the offseason the Train largely
aerobic ly
even though their distances are shorter
they're still not trying to trash
themselves
but we do know that even if you develop
your mitochondria if you do it correctly
and suddenly you throw yourself in an
acid bath your body is gonna be
unpleasantly surprised so what you need
to do is you need to model that so
what's going to happen is a couple of
weeks before the competition once a week
you were pretty much is like a something
similar to the competition like a water
whatever and this will accomplish
several things one is it will up
regulate your buffers so your body
produces baking soda pretty much to
cancel out the acid and it's a very
rapid adaptation it's very easy to get
just two weeks you got it
and in addition you also up regulates
your glycolytic enzymes which you also
want for competition and again they're
very quick to develop very quick to lose
as well so finally there is such a thing
as heart and respiration rate modelling
so which pretty much means that you're
gonna be sucking win and if you're not
used to sucking wind it's not gonna feel
good your diaphragm is gonna spasm and
not so good so the purpose of peaking is
to get yourself in kind of a simulated
competition situation where the acid is
high enough to make your body adapt to
it which adapts fast and to make
yourself comparable with Horry high
heart rates and breathing so that's
that's the summary that's pretty much
how track athletes train for
middle-distance what do you do now
account first of all how old do you 20
you look great thank you thank you great
haircut - thank you yeah I like it how
old you really I'm working on being
twenty Joe going back yeah
I'm 52 are you older than me I'm working
out we're both working good how about
you stick with that I don't want to be
judged based on my age I understand how
often
you train these days often do I train
almost every day almost every day just
doing something differently yeah doing
something mostly kettlebells or mostly
for the last several years with I
suppose less several month we're kind of
experimental doing something else but
for the last several years pretty much
has been nothing but swings and and dips
just one of my protocols it's a very
particular anti glycolytic protocol and
i glycolytic means well the kind of
thing we just discussed it just swings
in dips yeah why why that combination
trying to be minimalist pretty much and
trying to cover as much base as possible
also trying to do things that my body
likes but the swings are I would argue
that the swing is the most beneficial
exercise anybody can do because you will
again your training power your training
your fast fibers you're developing
mitochondria in the fast fibers you are
training your connective tissues and you
know you're getting your cardio as well
it's not you know it's not focused on
that but you have that side effect the
dip is you know kind of coverage what's
been missing I like the idea of very
minimus general strength protocols that
just have pretty much a hip hinge and
and the press that's that's a preference
without chin-ups or things along those
lines
sure is great I'll do him sometime but
you will find to your surprise that if
you do swings powerfully and if you do
dips or push-ups powerfully chances are
you're not going to lose your chance
really
chances are for most people so here's
something to keep in mind what is
general training versus specific
training so in Russian sports science
there is a concept of general training
versus special training special means
sports specific pretty much
so the general straight general training
can be strength can be something else
gives you foundation for everything else
and it's characterized by high degree of
carryover so for example if you decide
to do barbell squats you know for a fact
that you're going to
hire you gonna run fast you're gonna hit
order and so on and so forth if you
decide to go leg extensions you can be
sure that you're gonna get better at leg
extensions that's it so general
exercises are the ones that are fairly
simple to perform and give you to give
you the greatest possible carryover so
that's what you do and then after that
you start editing you more specific
stuff so let's say that you know you
would increase the number of chin-ups
you want to do what you got to do chips
so that's a specific practice absolutely
so Jennifer great one of the things that
I noticed that I thought was really
weird was when I started doing
kettlebells things that I wasn't doing I
got stronger at yeah like I wasn't doing
dips for a long time like I didn't do
them for months and months and I was
just doing kettlebells I was just doing
cleans and presses snatches swings a
bunch of different squat protocols
overhead squats my dip went through the
roof but it was so strange it was like
we call this the what the hell effect so
that type of carryover some of it we can
understand some words we can explain
some which we can't but yeah we've had
the kettlebell swing for example
increase the performance of world
champion power lifters and top marathon
runners at the same time it's a very
bizarre thing and again someone we talk
and decipher some with second but hey
we'll take it right what do you think is
going on there if you had a guess cuz
okay
so it's a number of different things one
is the type of the type of breathing
patterns that we use for example for
endurance that for that helps strength
and endurance so we use this pressurized
breathing that increases your strength
on exhalation so that pretty much
increases your strengths at any kind of
exertion whether it's punching or
lifting and at the same time we are also
training our muscles that inspiration
muscles inhalation muscles as well and
so developing developing these muscles
is really important for your performance
so that's just one of the aspects in
other aspects is the well this is kind
of interesting mr. Haney was
a coach for Danny Thompson Donnie
Thompson is he broke the 3000 pound
total record in in powerlifting some
years back so I'd known the Donnie for
some time so Donnie kept hurting his
back and his deadlift was stuck so we
met I showed her some kettlebell stuff
he started doing that invented a couple
of cool things of his own as well so
nine months later he added about 70
pounds to deadlift 100 pounds to his
benchpress said the total record and
what's what his coach said interesting
he said kettlebells work the muscles
without killing them it's kind of
interesting so it appears to be that the
particular stimulus that you have it's
there's always a positive and there's
always a negative when you're training
right
so there's something good that's
happening it's also something that's
holding you back you have to recover so
it seems to be that nature of whatever
things that happens within the muscle is
positive more than negative and I think
part of it is very well those ballistic
loading the body adapted extremely
extremely well part of it has to do the
particular training protocols we have
because we produced the right amount of
acid but not too much acid a lot of
trainees in the kind of a puffed fitness
world
they're just enamored with burn like oh
go for the burn yeah Fred Hatfield dr.
Fred hatch will have a great line so
Hadfield was the first lifter to squat a
thousand pounds in competition and he
was just a brilliant sports scientist
brilliant coach he said do you like burn
light a match yes people are just
enamored with the burn so again the
loading protocols we have his sights
that you have the right amount of that
of that stimulation not excessive
because what happens you have too much
like the Cassatt right is here's what
happens well many many things happen we
don't have the time to discuss this on
the show but most of them are really
rather than negative some positive
Muslim red the negative but for sure
they do make em work it makes you more
sore for sure
people like to say well soreness is just
caused by eccentric loading and that's
it has nothing do lactic acid
well eccentric loading does contribute
to that absolutely but acid does as well
he doesn't literally burn holes in your
muscle but it does stimulate lysosomes
something kind of eats up defective
components of the cell to function and
you also have the spike of free radicals
and so that free radicals damage cell
membranes as well so with what we do we
try to and plus there's other stuff
happens like but it starts producing
ammonia which is toxic and depletes your
ATP so all this things start going
there's really sideways so I think the
nature of what you do with kettlebells a
special fuse the correct protocol is you
just optimize this metabolic metabolic
environment to get exactly what you want
but there are some other things too like
in your case were pressing and for dips
I challenge anybody to find a pressing
exercise that's by mechanically more
perfect for the shoulder than the kettle
of millet repress it's perfect range of
motions perfect great stretch great
contraction great just absolutely
perfect so some were to get some we
don't but hey what the hell effects
we'll take it right so what do you spend
your time doing these days do you spend
your time teaching seminars coaching
people like writing books what do you
what's the all of the above so I I am
staying I'm working on I teach on
special events for a strong first which
is my company the school of strength
so I teach seminars like strong endorses
I can win and so on I write books and I
do some consulting but what I really am
trying to do is I'm trying to build
strong first you know this school of
strength my vision is that more people
want to become stronger and strength
will become cool strength will become
important and I'd like to see that
across the decades really doing strength
school now
among a small portion of the population
do you think that can actually change I
hope so I don't know I hope so why would
it change well we're working at it maybe
you'll do something about it who knows
but you know a friend of mine said
something interesting well friend John
he said today you have this very small
among young people a very small fraction
of the population this is super tough
guys for it is competing MMA and so on
these Daredevils doing extreme sports is
so on and you have the huge majority or
just sitting doing this or they go and
do their little Pilates thing or
whatever they do their little interval
session and I just think the society at
large needs more just just regular tough
guys you know like the old farmer or
somebody like that and I think that that
needs to be more broad and people need
to understand that that I hate this word
Fitness I just hate that because it
counters up images of just all sorts of
weird equipment and weird exercises and
foam rollers and all that stuff you know
you don't like foam rollers it's not
that I don't like foam rollers it's a
tool just like everything else right
here's a problem a guy comes in he
spends 45 minutes on some fancy he calls
a movement problem the hell's movement
prep and he's sitting around you know
rolling his butt in the foam roller and
then he does some other weird voodoo and
you know if he's injured and if he got a
prescription from his physical therapist
or doctor power to everybody but if not
and then finally is gonna spend ten
minutes doing some doing some little
nonsense get his heart rate up and
between sets is gonna be updating his
profile or whatever so the former all
you've got a it's got a place I'm even
gonna tell you like even doing any of
the corrective work something that you
need to do you should even separate it
from your training like don't dishonor
the lifting prop platform by throwing a
foam roller on it
just do somewhere else it really yeah
don't dishonor don't I thought it was
just a natural thing to sort of work the
kinks up fine
go work him out just do somewhere else
just don't do it by the platform man and
don't ever step over a barbell that's
the most disrespectful thing you can do
really absolutely you can't step over a
bar bono in Russia get beaten up and
thrown out of the gym JB you absolutely
that seems excessive
you gotta respect your van no you do and
stepping over a barbells disrespect
disrespect you have to go around it of
course of course yes how do I not know
this well now you do I'd uh I'm trying
to think what I do I'm sure I've stepped
over barbells it will get even nobody
ever taught me that barbell get you yeah
really
oh okay I didn't know when you see gyms
you know well we see gyms like mine that
have all this equipment all these
different things do you look at that as
like that's excessive or unnecessary
enjoy that depends the old defense in
the circumstances we're talking about
CrossFit generally like we talking about
CrossFit CrossFit early I think CrossFit
gyms
I love CrossFit gyms I mean they have a
few things I think are not necessary but
not so many but they have a lot of great
stuff hi pull-up bars and platforms and
so on and so forth those are essentials
but then beyond that is just whatever
you add for yourself and without knowing
your training needs your bag your honor
I don't truly I can't evaluate your gym
right but I can tell you that most
people have too much stuff and that
becomes a problem choices so you come
any of this and this and that so what
are you gonna do bra you're just
confused because it's called the paradox
of choice or some like that yes yes now
what about injuries how often do you get
injured from this kind of exercise see
I've had a number injures in my life
older contact injuries like you know
fractures and things like that and
they're not from they're not from
lifting from lifting things were all
tweaks all of them were tweaks mmm but
you know tearing ligaments by falling
and things like that no so you've never
had issues with tendonitis or a pedal
the some of that some of that doing
training pull-ups Javian things like
this happen what do you do to combat
that that's exactly what I got mine from
sure yeah well first of all provide it
in the absence of medical restrictions
you just work around things so you find
things to do that work the area without
aggravating it that's does you know this
kind of the age-old prescription for
what you want to do and but I'm telling
you that a lot of things we do are
allowing a lot of people to get back in
the game people have been really injured
before and I can tell you that the
techniques we use a strong first
gettable techniques and some other
techniques we have supporters amongst
top healthcare professionals people like
Professor Stewart McGill who is uh top
spine by mechanists in the world and who
works with the elite of the elite of
athletes and also the most broken down
people Greg cook who's a top physical
therapist people like that so we have a
very good track record of keeping people
healthy I like this old expression from
George the Russian line Hackenschmidt
strength cannot be divorced from health
I think that's a great line that's a
great line yeah that's a great line I
specifically have something with my
bicep tendon I think I got it from two
things I got it from training doing a
lot of chin-ups but also from archery
because in archery you're extending as
you're drawing back at the same time and
this particular muscle gets overworked
because well have dr. mark Chang I know
you know doc check you out
yeah yeah yeah I'll talk to him um what
about your diet I'm an enemy of
nutrition I didn't know anything about I
don't like it's such a confusing thing
I'm telling you in training it's really
kind of funny about training in training
like I do my thing you do your a thing
he does here thing but we kind of it's
cool right right in nutrition is like
it's the only way right and there are so
many different variables that it's very
hard to keep track of ins so I just feel
sorry for people in that field I really
it's enough you have to constantly be
reading papers you have to constantly be
studying and it's still hopeless yes
it's just really hopeless it's such a
you know the body is a complex system
but I think this particular this
particular silo is worse than others
you're just so nonlinear and it's just
so
difficult to figure this out biological
variability is so confusing to with one
person the diet would be optimal the
other person it would be terrible you
know I think what we should do is focus
whether it's in diet or in training we
should try to focus on things that are
more universal so for example in terms
of longevity dr. Nick Lane who is a
mitochondrial researcher he made a very
interesting point he said right now
phalangeal t so many efforts are
directed at the genetic engineering
manipulation whatever fooling around
trying to make this really really
customized and he said you know what's
really interesting why don't we try to
focus on something that's been known to
work not just for any individual works
for practice every species which is
mitochondrial health and he says that if
we find a way of extending though I've
spent 130 years old he's pretty sure
it's gonna come from mitochondrial
health and the stimuli for mitochondrial
health are pretty much well known well
there may be some more down the road but
now we do know so for example in terms
of nutrition that's that's fasting in
terms of exercise it is both I robic
steady-state exercise and that type of
work for fast fibers that I told you
about anti glycolytic training and
[Music]
there's cold so those are the stimuli
the primary stimuli for the mitochondria
so probably for nutrition the same thing
they should look for more things that
work for everybody and then and kind of
on the margins try to fool around with
customization what about you personally
what kind of diet you fall back some
years ago I met a very interesting gent
or a half Meckler and he introduced me
to his so-called warrior diet and I was
not interested in any kind of a diet any
kind of a body cam changes I'm just not
into that kind of thing but what I
tracked him is efficiency
he said to eat once a day and I thought
sure I'll try and this was long before
the current intermittent fasting
craze has begun so I don't think or he's
getting quite the credit he deserves so
I pretty much as he had a large dinner
and don't worry about it
do you snack it all during the day
anything nothing it kills me bad really
yeah and this has always been the case
you know snack who kills you or it's
good old yes no since I started this
this way of eating so your body's
acclimated to this one large meal it did
it did and I just feel great when I do
that you gotta slam a lot of calories
down on one wheel though right yeah what
do you eat steak mostly of course no
chicken just say no to chicken say no to
chickens I know why what's wrong with
chicken I just lame I don't like it
what do you like about the taste or what
it stands for it's a weak burger so it
is a weak bird yeah can't even fly just
just just say no to chicken really yeah
Wow what up what about fish well my wife
makes me all you didn't not not out of
choice but mostly meat yeah but you
understand what I'm telling is just
personal choices and of course not
fashionable recommendations I understand
totally out of my house but what about
vegetables yeah vegetables just kind of
a necessary evil you I do eat them
what's necessary about them you know
this is an interesting point same dock
Nick Lane did some research and
summarized some other research like why
our fruit and vegetables good for you
and the party line is the antioxidants
and they almost convincingly concluded
that's not the case because if you just
try to isolate antioxidants just give it
to people they don't have the same
effect so the current theory is quite
you know and it's very likely it's true
is the plant toxins pretty much foremost
hormesis hormesis pretty much resistance
against stuff so it's pretty much mild
doses of poison that you take to make
yourself stronger so that's most likely
what these things are good for
but anytime you hear about antioxidants
this antioxidants that it's unless are
prescribed by dr. to particular patients
a patient antioxidant supplementation
might even cost cancer so there's no
reason that yeah that's just not
something to shotgun or go to the
pharmacy buy all this stuff no you
should know exactly what you're taking
them for and should be a that should be
you should gather recommendation
prescription from your doctor that is
correct
have you ever do you know anybody that
follows a carnivore diet what's the
cargo died carnivore diets very recent
but in the last few years people are
eating only animal products okay and the
great benefit that some people have had
is people with autoimmune issues like
skin conditions eczema things along
those lines it seems to cure it up
people with severe arthritis it's I mean
by cutting out all plant foods
completely some people with autoimmune
issues have found great results some
people found great results with
depression but it's extremely
controversial and you know it's also
ideologically troubling for some people
some people don't want you to eat meat
at all so if you're eating only meat
this is terrible you're sending a bad
message okay which sounds like a fun
diet man sounds awesome but I'm
completely unqualified to comment on
right it would you would be interested
in trying it would I be interested in
trying it I when I see some more
research in that I might not that I'm a
fan of vegetables or anything so I'm you
know I would consider it you say
vegetables with disdain you say
vegetables like understand it's a
necessary evil
you understand certain things it's like
your foam roller Joe but you know you
just do it it's not you don't enjoy it
that thing next to you the Tim Tam
that's what I use instead of a phone
roller that jackhammer right underneath
the tripod and go that's uh that was
invented by MMA coach for Asami okay
cool more effective so that's better
than a quick to better than vegetables I
don't know a better than foam roller I
think so
but but that's what I'm saying like for
a guy like you that talks about
vegetables with such disdain
I would think but it's a necessary evil
this is the thing I'm based on the
current not involved the docs will tell
you all this stuff about fiber and this
and that that's supposedly good and
again that's that's not my specialty but
this other point about hormesis which is
again building up your resistance yes
resilience to things so it's very
possible vegetables are evil and the
small doses of this evil make us
stronger doses well well tiny like a
quarter of your plate
yeah well should be more probably
probably it's just a funny subject with
you you have an interesting right oh
yeah I'm an enemy of nutrition I hate it
i I just really hate it I have a
sympathy deep sympathy for people who
are in that line of work
now do you supplement with multi
vitamins or creatine or anything no I
don't and you know creatine is
definitely supplementation it's not my
specialty either but I can tell you
Korean is one of those supplements that
definitely has been tested extensively
and while not for everybody it does work
yes it's also build a lot of people it's
also been proven as a nootropic which i
think it's fascinating so it's very much
enhances cognitive performance again out
of my I don't have cognitive performance
so you don't have any I don't know not
not my thing so what about vitamins you
take any vitamin no there's there's
there's no evidence and again if if you
would get a prescription from your
doctor you're shorting this mmm-hmm then
you should this is essentially not your
wheelhouse absolutely not what about
sleep I'm a big fan how much do you get
I get a lot more than most most people
would I try to get nine hours oh greats
that's I am convinced I'm convinced
based on the research that I've seen
that it's that is very important yeah
I'm convinced that as well yeah I find a
big difference in my performance both
mental and physical when I have a lot of
sleep but what disturbs me that we had
this guy on dr. Matthew Walker who
studies sleep extensively and you know
he's a sleep expert there's a direct
correlation between a bunch of diseases
and people not getting sleep
heart attacks you know their heart
attacks jump up some number of worldwide
something in the neighborhood of 20 plus
when they do daylight savings time when
people lose an hour that's the most
idiotic idea that's it I hope it goes
away - I was just in Arizona and one of
the things first things I said to them
on stage I was like I'm so happy that
you guys don't follow this stupid shit
it's so dumb like okay we jump forward
we move back we do this we do oh it's
very cute yeah the time is the time if
it's dark out early then it's dark out
early why is it so troubling for people
and I think I've read somewhere that
messes up the cows did they start
milking the cows at an hour later
earlier the cows are all unhappy and
everybody's what have you well it
increases heart attacks something in the
neighborhood 20 plus percent and then
when you gain an hour sleep there's a
subsequent decrease in heart rate in
heart attacks rather that's very similar
as well somewhere in the neighborhood of
20% well the point I think is this that
we're all very busy there's a lot of
stuff going on everybody has limited
bandwidth but trying to save on sleep
that's not the right place yeah and I
completely agree now what about do you
do anything to recover like cryotherapy
or any of those things ice baths right
now
no because it's just not logistically
not very convenient but yeah I used to
cut a hole in the ice and good opinion
there when I lived in cold places and
have done things like that Russia has a
long history of a practice called
tempering and that goes back I don't
know centuries which is pretty much cold
exposure they figured out that does
promote your nonspecific resistance to a
lot of things colds and so on and so
forth and more recent studies they found
out that pretty much increases your
resistance also so free radical damage
and so on a way so cold is really good
definitely is really good if you have a
chance to do that other things that are
very good if they're used correctly is
hypoxia hypercapnia I'm pretty much
breathing less but doing in the correct
manner but there is something that you
need to keep in mind when you start
getting a really fancy and all these
different recovery modalities so these
differ
supplements and massages and whatever
whatever that was also I believe
professor vorobyev who made a point of
that that accelerating the recovery
first of all accelerating the rate of
adaptation is just just not normal and
again is gonna be less stable and second
that just makes your body less able to
handle by itself mmm spoiling yourself
with it I think so again not my
specialty
but I think it should be used
judiciously and I also think that too
many people are studying to get into the
fancy cars era P this or fancy
supplement or machine that before
they've just taken care of basics hmm so
what are the basics if yours let's say
that you are okay for an athlete or for
a normal person so what are the basics
for health for a normal person obviously
we discussed earlier you want to have
type 2 fibers and mitochondria and then
when you're older so that means you've
got to lift have you're fast there's no
other way there's no third way and you
just have to find the exercises that
your body can tolerate the next thing is
obviously have to do something for your
heart it's not in that much so whatever
lame government guidelines are out there
usually that will suffice for that then
today we know about sleep obviously and
today we also know about other ways of
promoting this overall resilience and
again cold things like cold things like
things like vegetables but strengths for
that for the athlete so I guess if you
get your if you get your diet all you're
eating and again what is the correct
eating I have no clue but I tell you
what there is probably a couple things
that most experts would agree on they'll
probably tell you lay off the sugar and
eat some green vegetables whatever
probably everybody except for those
carnival guys will agree on that
so get your nutrition dialed in get your
sleep doubt then then get strong so I
named organization strong first because
that's the primary quality so professor
matt wave he made a point that
that's the mother of all qualities upon
the foundation of strengths you build
endurance you build speed evil power you
build resilience everything so get
strong have your joint mobility in order
have some amounts of endurance the
minimum if you deserve it for health
again those government guidelines are
enough more if your sport requires that
then get great coaching and then when
you're almost a contender and then you
can start fooling around with all the
you know additional stuff on the
periphery and those things are really
personal they're really expensive
second of all some of these modalities
but second of all you know you might get
some a microscopic fraction of a percent
of improvement to your performance and
if you're training for the Olympics it's
absolutely worth it but if you're not
you gotta consider the point of
diminishing returns so like what are you
doing with your life what are you
spending your time on and the point of
diminishing returns happens and
everything so it's again if you just
want to be healthy you don't want to
hammer win just one thing like whoa I
just want to build up my deadlift to its
highest level or I just want to run the
fastest 5k you train your deadlift you
do some running you eat healthy maybe
you add some cold exposure maybe you had
some hypoxia maybe eat your vegetables
you know so adding each successive thing
you get to the point of diminishing
returns but if you decide to be a
specialist you still have to do this
general work what about sauna great use
it mmm sauna is grateful a lot of
different reasons right now normally
they just talk about things like micro
circulation which is all good heat shock
proteins which is all very good but
there's also something else there is a
very interesting phenomenon that it's
called our mad
what does it stand for something about
acute react a relaxation reaction to
stress I don't recall the acronym
exactly how it goes but hypothermia and
hyperthermia he
as amongst of the stimulus hypoxia as
well that allows you to develop reaction
in your body that didn't response to
stress you're gonna be more relaxed so
this is kind of an interesting thing so
it's definitely healthy thing definitely
well listen man
we've taken up a lot of your time and I
appreciate you very much and I
appreciate all the work you've done and
like I said I've been a big fan for a
long time but I think someone wants to
find a gym that follows your protocols
where's-where's the best way go too
strong first calm first is spelled out
and we do have a director of accredited
gyms in the US and elsewhere and also
our certified instructors as well and
your most recent book my most recent
book is the quick and the dead
total training for the advanced
minimalist but that is for the advanced
minimalist so I presume that's not for
the majority of of listeners so I also
bought the same time came out with an
updated edition of my kettlebells simple
and sinister and that I believe firmly
believe is the book for most people to
most people whether it's grandma Betty
or Ranger Joe that to train on to get
started on all right beautiful well
thank you very much thank you sir thank
you all right bye everybody
[Music]
[Applause]